PyAnalySeries provides several methods to estimate the power spectral density
of a signal.
These methods rely on the Pyleoclim module, which itself builds
on spectral analysis methods available in SciPy.
The goal here is to make these methods easily accessible
within the application, so they can be tested and compared
interactively.
For each method, the most essential parameters have been exposed
in the interface, allowing quick exploration of the different spectral
estimators.
Let’s return to our example.
We use the “ PercAndes ” series to investigate its
significant periodicities, using the different methods on the original, resampled
or smoothed series.
Select a series, then go to Process and choose “
Spectral Estimation ”, with PSD standing for Power Spectral Density
The Periodogram is the most direct estimator of the power
spectral density.
It is simple and easy to interpret, but it can
be noisy.
The idea is to quickly explore the impact of different
parameters.
Press Compute, or simply modify a parameter, and the plot
updates automatically.
You can clean up your tests by removing the last
spectrum from the stack using the “ Remove last ”
option.
Welch’s method improves the estimate by splitting the signal into
overlapping segments and averaging their spectra.
MTM, for Multi-Taper Method, uses several tapers to obtain a
more stable spectral estimate.
Lomb–Scargle is especially useful for unevenly spaced time series.
Wavelet analysis, using WWZ, explores how periodicities evolve through time
For each method, you can access the corresponding documentation through
a dedicated link.
Each method also has its own prerequisites, such as standardization
or interpolation.
These steps are handled automatically by the interface, so there
is no need to perform them beforehand.
The spectrum is displayed on a logarithmic scale and fully
supports zooming.
Once saved, each computed spectrum appears in the main window
with its dedicated icon.
Using “ Display Together ” allows you to visualize them
simultaneously.
In practice, we compute and save the MTM and wavelet
spectra on the resampled record.
For advanced spectral analysis, it is recommended to explore Pyleoclim
in a Python or notebook environment, to fine-tune method-specific parameters
and ensure full reproducibility of the results.